---
layout: post
title: Race Report - Rookie Tri 2016
image: /assets/post_images/2016-05-10-race-report-rookie-triathlon/swim.jpg
---

A couple of weeks ago I competed in my first triathlon, a super sprint distance
race aptly named the [Rookie Tri](http://therookietri.com/). It's a 300 meter
swim, followed by an 11.2 mile bike ending off with a 2 mile run. I'm registered
to race the Olympic Distance (1500m swim, 40km bike, 10km run) at the
[CapTex Triathlon](http://www.captextri.com/) at the end of the month, so I
figured this would be good practice. I'm so glad I did it, I learned a ton.

Before getting into the specific lessons I took away, I'd like to heartily
recommend this event. It's a lot of fun and the organizers go to great lengths
to make it accessible to newcomers to multisport. Triathlons are intimidating,
but this one really isn't -- mostly because so many people are first timers
right there with you. I never once felt like I should have known something I
didn't.

The swim is the most intimidating part of a triathlon for a lot of people. For
most newer triathletes I talk to, this is their weakest discipline and the idea
of a mass start seems downright insane to them. The Rookie Tri gets around this
by breaking people into divisions when they register. Competitive triathletes
can register in the "Open" division meaning they'd like to compete with others
regardless of age group. This is the only group that actually does a mass swim.
After that there are "Veteran" (meaning you've done 2 or more triathlons in the
past) and "Rookie" (meaning this is your first or second triathlon) divisions
who each start the swim 2 people at a time in their age group. It was a very
relaxed way to start the race and made the swim portion a lot less terrifying.

People had told me ahead of the time that the bike portion would be hilly. I
guess I take a certain amount of hilliness for granted, because I didn't find it
so bad and in fact used the hills to pass people. Cycling is my strongest
discipline, so keep that in mind. The run portion was mostly on grass and
involved doing an out and back, so you would pass the people in front of you.
There was a short uphill section of the run, which just made it more
interesting.

Another way that the Rookie Tri is particularly beginner friendly is that awards
are given out separately for rookies and veterans. That means I was only
competing with other rookies in my age group, and I managed to come away with a
3rd place finish! All in all I was really happy with how things went. Here's a
list of take aways I left with:

1. [Race belts](http://www.amazon.com/VeloChampion-Triathlon-Race-Number-Belt/dp/B00AQ0TEL0?ie=UTF8&psc=1&redirect=true&ref_=oh_aui_detailpage_o00_s00)
   are great for triathlons. When you pick up your race packet, you get your bib
   number and some safety pins. The USAT rules state that you must wear your
   race bib number for the duration of the bike and run, but clearly it wouldn't
   be possible to wear it during the swim (it would either get soaked and soggy,
   or get torn up if you wear a wetsuit). The idea of fiddling with safety pins
   during a T1 seemed insane to me, so I took the advice and opted for a race
   belt and just left it in my transition area with the bib number already
   attached. All I had to do was clip it around my waist when going from the
   swim to the bike. I bought
   [this one](http://www.amazon.com/VeloChampion-Triathlon-Race-Number-Belt/dp/B00AQ0TEL0?ie=UTF8&psc=1&redirect=true&ref_=oh_aui_detailpage_o00_s00)
   made by VeloChampion and it worked just fine for me.

2. Pace yourself. 

3. Watch your step.

4. Finish strong.
