---
layout: post
title: Race Report - Rookie Tri 2016
image: /assets/post_images/2016-05-19-race-report-rookie-triathlon/swim.jpg
---

A few weeks ago I competed in my first triathlon, a super sprint distance race
aptly named the [Rookie Tri](http://therookietri.com/). It's a 300 meter swim,
followed by an 11.2 mile bike ending off with a 2 mile run. I'm registered to
race the Olympic Distance (1500m swim, 40km bike, 10km run) at the [CapTex
Triathlon](http://www.captextri.com/) at the end of the month, so I figured this
would be good practice. I'm so glad I did it, I had a great time and learned a
ton.

Before getting into the specific lessons I took away, I'd like to heartily
recommend this event. It's a lot of fun and the organizers go to great lengths
to make it accessible to newcomers to multisport. Triathlons are intimidating,
but this one really isn't -- mostly because so many people are first timers
right there with you. I never once felt like I should have known something I
didn't.

The swim is the most intimidating part of a triathlon for a lot of people. For
most newer triathletes I talk to, this is their weakest discipline and the idea
of a mass start seems downright insane to them. The Rookie Tri gets around this
by breaking people into divisions when they register. Competitive triathletes
can register in the "Open" division meaning they'd like to compete with others
regardless of age group. This is the only group that actually does a mass swim.
After that there are "Veteran" (meaning you've done 2 or more triathlons in the
past) and "Rookie" (meaning this is your first or second triathlon) divisions
who each start the swim 2 people at a time in their age group. It was a very
relaxed way to start the race and made the swim portion a lot less terrifying.

People had told me ahead of the time that the bike portion would be hilly. I
guess I take a certain amount of hilliness for granted, because I didn't find it
so bad and in fact used the hills to pass people. Cycling is my strongest
discipline, so keep that in mind. The run portion was mostly on grass and
involved doing an out and back, so you would pass the people in front of you.
There was a short uphill section of the run, which just made it more
interesting.

Another way that the Rookie Tri is particularly beginner friendly is that awards
are given out separately for rookies and veterans. That means I was only
competing with other rookies in my age group, and I managed to come away with a
3rd place finish! That was a great feeling considering it was my first race.

![Podium for 35-39 age group](/assets/post_images/2016-05-19-race-report-rookie-triathlon/podium.jpg)


All in all I was really happy with how things went. Here's a list of take aways:

1. *Race belts are a life saver*. When you pick up your race packet, you get
   your bib number and some safety pins. The USAT rules state that you must wear
   your race bib number for the duration of the bike and run, but clearly it
   wouldn't be possible to wear it during the swim (it would either get soaked
   and soggy, or get torn up if you wear a wetsuit). The idea of fiddling with
   safety pins during a T1 seemed insane to me, so I took the advice and opted
   for a race belt and just left it in my transition area with the bib number
   already attached. All I had to do was clip it around my waist when going from
   the swim to the bike. I bought [one made by
   VeloChampion](http://www.amazon.com/VeloChampion-Triathlon-Race-Number-Belt/dp/B00AQ0TEL0?ie=UTF8&psc=1&redirect=true&ref_=oh_aui_detailpage_o00_s00)
   and it worked great for me.

2. *Pace yourself*. I made two pacing mistakes. I underestimated how hard the
   swim would be and I killed my legs on the bike. Full of adrenaline, I went
   out at full force when the swim started. Swimming is my weakest discipline
   and I remember being surprised when I was passing all these much more
   confident looking people! Then at about the 150 meter mark, holy hell I
   started to feel it and need to tread water and take a break for a bit. The
   second half of the swim was a lot harder than it needed to be as a result.
   Once on the bike, I pushed pretty hard which felt good at the time. I passed
   dozens of people and only got passed by one. I paid for it on the run though,
   so careful here. My run splits were about 8:20/mile which is slow for me on
   a 2 mile run, I should have been able to pull off 7:00/mile or faster. The
   lesson I'm taking away from this is that I need to do more brick workouts
   so I can better understand what I'm capable of on the bike without killing
   my legs.

3. *Watch your step*. The transition area is going to be hectic. I expected
   that. What I didn't expect was that I would step on a bunch of burrs with my
   bare feet and have tiny barbs in my foot for the rest of the race - that
   sucked! When you're setting up your transition area in the morning, take a
   moment to have look around and make sure it's not in an area with lots of
   sharp brush, rocks, etc. You'll be running there straight out of the swim and
   you'll be a bit disoriented, so make sure you pick a spot with a clear path.
   Additionally, practice making your way to your transition area from both
   directions depending on the course map. I had it down coming from the swim,
   but got a bit lost in T2 which probably cost me a minute or two.

4. *Finish strong*. It's easy to start to ease off when you see the finish line.
   You're exhausted, you've been pushing yourself hard, but now isn't the time
   to slow down! With just a few hundred feet to go, I noticed too late that
   a guy behind me was starting to up his pace and now my "finishing photo"
   is a shot of that other guy crossing the finish line right in front of me.
   It's a race, and all in good fun - we even high fived each other right
   afterwards, but I do wish that I'd crossed the finish line ahead of him.
   Lesson learned - never again!

All in all it was a really great race and a really great experience. Multisport
is intimidating and I'd heartily recommend the Rookie Tri to any newcomers to
the sport as a perfect way to get your feet wet (literally!). I'll be there next
year, competing in the Veteran category.